
                             LPT Joystick adapter

Building this LPT Joystick adapter is really easy. Easier than building its
compatibles. Below you can see the PC Parallel port and the 9 pin Joystick
port. Both viewed from the side you have connect them with wires.

  The PC Parallel port:

            SELECT   BUSY            DATA 7 - DATA 0
              ณ       ณ       ฺฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤมฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฟ
              V       V       ณ                           ณ
           ษออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออป
           บ 13  12  11  10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1   บ
           บ  o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   บ
           ศอป                                                  ษอผ
             บ  o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   o   บ
             บ 25  24  23  22  21  20  19  18  17  16  15  14   บ
             ศออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออออผ
                ณ                           ณ
                ภฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤยฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤฤู
                           GROUND

  C64/Amiga/Atari 9 pin Joystick port:

                              RIGHT LEFT DOWN UP
                                  ณ   ณ   ณ   ณ
                                  V   V   V   V
                           ษออออออออออออออออออออออป
                           บ  5   4   3   2   1   บ
                           บ  o   o   o   o   o   บ
                           ศอป                  ษอผ
                             บ  o   o   o   o   บ
                             บ  9   8   7   6   บ
                             ศออออออออออออออออออผ
                                    ^       ^
                                    ณ       ณ
                                  GROUND   FIRE

  Connect the following pins for Joy 1:

                           Joy 1               Parallel

                           1 (UP)--------------2 (DATA0)
                           2 (DOWN)------------3 (DATA1)
                           3 (LEFT)------------4 (DATA2)
                           4 (RIGHT)-----------5 (DATA3)
                           6 (FIRE)------------13 (SELECT)
                           8 (GROUND)----------25 (GROUND)

  Connect the following pins for Joy 2:

                           Joy 2               Parallel

                           1 (UP)--------------6 (DATA4)
                           2 (DOWN)------------7 (DATA5)
                           3 (LEFT)------------8 (DATA6)
                           4 (RIGHT)-----------9 (DATA7)
                           6 (FIRE)------------11 (BUSY)
                           8 (GROUND)----------25 (GROUND)

And this is all. You only need a Parallel LPT plug, a cable with at least 12
wires and two 9 pin Joystick ports. This adapter was designed and copyrighted
by Credo, you have the right to use, build and code it. In this directory you
can find a little program (LJOYTEST.EXE) to test this cable. You also can find
its Assembly source in this directory (LJOYTEST.ASM) to learn how to code this
adapter under EOS. If you have more questions, e-mail me at credo@bigfoot.com.

                           LPT Joystick adapter FAQ

Q: What do I need to build this adapter?
A: You need a standard PC Parallel LPT plug, a cable with at least 12 wires
and two 9 pin Joystick ports as you can see above.

Q: Where can I buy the Parallel plug and the at least 12 wires cable?
A: I think you can find everywhere little electronic shops for the hobby
hardware makers. In the USA there are a lot of shops like this, called Radio
Shack. You sure can find this plug and cable somewhere.

Q: Where can I buy the 9 pin Joystick ports?
A: I think this is a real problem. Try to ask in little electronic shops (in
the USA Radio Shack). Also you can remove these plugs from old broken
hardwares like C64, ZX Spectrum adapter, Amiga and others. (Remember, remove
it on your own risk and remove only if the hardware is really broken.) Also
you can cut in half your Joystick cable and connect the cable directly to the
Parallel plug. (Cut it on your own risk and cut it only if you are sure you
never gonna use your Joystick in a standard Joystick port.)

Q: Is this adapter compatible with the Champ Cable?
A: No. I think Champ Cable is just as simple as this one, but the wires
are connected to different pins.

Q: Is this adapter compatible with the Amiga 4-Player-Adapter?
A: Yes. There was some adapters available for the Amiga with or without games.
This adapter is 100% compatible with those. It means you can use those
adapters with EOS and you can use this adapter with a lot of Amiga games.
(I've tested only Dan Rhodes Dogfight, Kick Off 2 and Great Courts 2. All of
them worked perfectly.)

Q: Are you responsible for anything?
A: No. Building and using this adapter can't cause any problems as we know.
Anyway, we are not responsible for any software or hardware damage, work or
profit loss or anything else caused by the building, not building, using or
not using this adapter. Build or not build, use or not use it on your own
risk. If you are too young to be responsible for you activities (below 18
years, but depends allways on the local laws too), your parents or guardians
are responsible for your activities.

Q: How long can be the cable?
A: I think you don't need a too long cable. But as I know a longer cable can
work too. Use a long cable if you wish. Everything depends on the resistance
of the cable you use. This is a digital parallel adapter, the resistance can't
cause as much problem as in the serial or analog things.

Q: My AutoFire doesn't works good on PC. What is the problem?
A: The AutoFire on these Joysticks are using the 5V available on pin 4 of the
C64, Amiga and Atari ports. With the Amiga 4-Player-Adapter you also can use
the AutoFire, because there is 5V available on pin 14 of the Amiga Parallel
port. But on the PC Parallel port there is no 5V, and I left it making the
cable more easy to build. If you really need the AutoFire, try to get the 5V
from the PC GamePort or an additional power source. Without 5V the AutoFire
doesn't blinking just set the FireButton on. (This also can be useful
sometimes.)

Q: Only the two FireButtons are working. What is the problem?
A: There is a problem with the ECP Parallel ports. With these you can't use
this and the compatible adapters. These Parallel ports are built to a lot of
486 and Pentium boards. You can change the port to SPP, ECP, EPP and combined
modes, but nothing will help. Buy an additional LPT card and disable the on
board Parallel port. The additional LPT card will work and is very cheap.

Credo <credo@bigfoot.com>
